Update changelog for 0.17.0 (#6210)
aws/eks-anywhere: docs/content/en/docs/whatsnew/changelog.md

* Installing CSI as part of VSphere cluster creation was deprecated in version `v0.16.0` and has been removed in `v0.17.0`. Please refer to the [deprecation section]({{< relref "../getting-started/vsphere/vsphere-getstarted/#vsphere-csi-driver-deprecation" >}}) in the vSphere provider documentation for more information.
{{% /alert %}}

## [v0.17.0]()

### Adds

### Upgrades

### Fixes

### Deprecates

### Removes

> - Installing CSI as part of VSphere cluster creation.

Reviewer: We need a docs page showing users 1) how to upgrade from v0.16 to v0.17 transitioning from EKS-A managed to self-managed vSphere CSI 2) how to self-manage vSphere CSI. That page needs to be linked here.

* Installing CSI as part of VSphere cluster creation was deprecated in version `v0.16.0` and has been removed in `v0.17.0`. Please refer to the [deprecation section]({{< relref "../getting-started/vsphere/vsphere-getstarted/#vsphere-csi-driver-deprecation" >}}) in the vSphere provider documentation for more information.
{{% /alert %}}

## [v0.17.0](https://github.com/aws/eks-anywhere/releases/tag/v0.17.0)

### Supported OS version details

> |              | vSphere | Baremetal |  Nutanix | Cloudstack | Snow  |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
|              | vSphere | Bare Metal |  Nutanix | Cloudstack | Snow  |
```

|    :---:     |  :---:  |   :---:   |   :---:  |    :---:   | :---: |
| Ubuntu       | 20.04	 | 20.04     |	20.04             | Not supported	     | 20.04 |  
| Bottlerocket | 1.13.1  | 1.13.1    |  Not supported     | Not supported	     | Not supported   |
| RHEL         | 8.7	   | 8.7	     |  Not supported     | 8.7	               | Not supported   |

### Added

> - Add support for codecommit repository in FluxConfig with git configuration[#4290](https://github.com/aws/eks-anywhere/issues/4290)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Add support for CodeCommit repository in FluxConfig with git configuration[#4290](https://github.com/aws/eks-anywhere/issues/4290)
```

- Add new information to the EKS Anywhere Cluster status [#5628](https://github.com/aws/eks-anywhere/issues/5628):

>   - Add the ControlPlaneInitialized, ControlPlaneReady, DefaultCNIConfigured, WorkersReady, and Ready conditions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - Add the `ControlPlaneInitialized`, `ControlPlaneReady`, `DefaultCNIConfigured`, `WorkersReady`, and `Ready` conditions.
```

>   - Add the observedGeneration field.

Reviewer 2: Make consistent with other fields.

```suggestion
  - Add the ObservedGeneration field.
```

>   - Add the FailureReason field.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - Add the `failureReason` field.
```

> - Add support for different machine templates for control plane, etcd, and worker node in VSphere provider[#4255](https://github.com/aws/eks-anywhere/issues/4255)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Add support for different machine templates for control plane, etcd, and worker node in vSphere provider[#4255](https://github.com/aws/eks-anywhere/issues/4255)
```

> - Add support for kubernetes version 1.25, 1.26, and 1.27 to Cloudstack provider[#6167](https://github.com/aws/eks-anywhere/pull/6167)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Add support for Kubernetes version 1.25, 1.26, and 1.27 to CloudStack provider[#6167](https://github.com/aws/eks-anywhere/pull/6167)
```

> - Add bootstrap cluster backup in the event of cluster upgrade error[#6086](https://github.com/aws/eks-anywhere/pull/6086)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Add bootstrap cluster backup in the event of cluster upgrade error [#6086](https://github.com/aws/eks-anywhere/pull/6086)
```

> - Add support for organizing VMs in categories in Nutanix provider[#6014](https://github.com/aws/eks-anywhere/pull/6014)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Add support for organizing virtual machines into categories with the Nutanix provider [#6014](https://github.com/aws/eks-anywhere/pull/6014)
```

### Upgraded

### Changed

> - Change the default node startup timeout from 10m to 20m in BareMetal probifer [#5942](https://github.com/aws/eks-anywhere/issues/5942)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Change the default node startup timeout from 10m to 20m in Bare Metal provider [#5942](https://github.com/aws/eks-anywhere/issues/5942)
```

### Fixed

> - Fix cluster creation failure when the provider datacenterconfig is missing apiVersion field [#6096](https://github.com/aws/eks-anywhere/issues/6096)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Fix cluster creation failure when the `<Provider>DatacenterConfig` is missing `apiVersion` field [#6096](https://github.com/aws/eks-anywhere/issues/6096)
```

> - Allow registry mirror configurations to be mutable for BR [#2336](https://github.com/aws/eks-anywhere-build-tooling/pull/2336)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Allow registry mirror configurations to be mutable for Bottlerocket [#2336](https://github.com/aws/eks-anywhere-build-tooling/pull/2336)
```

- Patch an issue where mutable fields in the EKS Anywhere CloudStack API failed to trigger upgrades [#5910](https://github.com/aws/eks-anywhere/issues/5910)

### Deprecated

### Removed

> - Installing CSI as part of VSphere cluster creation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Installing CSI as part of vSphere cluster creation.
```

{{% /alert %}}

## [v0.17.0](https://github.com/aws/eks-anywhere/releases/tag/v0.17.0)

### Supported OS version details
|              | vSphere | Bare Metal |  Nutanix | CloudStack | Snow  |
|    :---:     |  :---:  |   :---:   |   :---:  |    :---:   | :---: |
| Ubuntu       | 20.04	 | 20.04     |	20.04             | Not supported	     | 20.04 |  
|              | 22.04   | 22.04     |  22.04             | Not supported      | Not supported   |
| Bottlerocket | 1.13.1  | 1.13.1    |  Not supported     | Not supported	     | Not supported   |
| RHEL         | 8.7	   | 8.7	     |  Not supported     | 8.7	               | Not supported   |

### Added
- Add support for AWS CodeCommit repositories in FluxConfig with git configuration [#4290](https://github.com/aws/eks-anywhere/issues/4290)
- Add new information to the EKS Anywhere Cluster status [#5628](https://github.com/aws/eks-anywhere/issues/5628):
  - Add the `ControlPlaneInitialized`, `ControlPlaneReady`, `DefaultCNIConfigured`, `WorkersReady`, and `Ready` conditions.
  - Add the `observedGeneration` field.
  - Add the `failureReason` field.

> - Add support for different machine templates for control plane, etcd, and worker node in vSphere provider [#4255](https://github.com/aws/eks-anywhere/issues/4255)

Reviewer 3: We also added it for Cloudstack  https://github.com/aws/eks-anywhere/pull/6291

- Add support for Kubernetes version 1.25, 1.26, and 1.27 to CloudStack provider [#6167](https://github.com/aws/eks-anywhere/pull/6167)
- Add bootstrap cluster backup in the event of cluster upgrade error [#6086](https://github.com/aws/eks-anywhere/pull/6086)
- Add support for organizing virtual machines into categories with the Nutanix provider [#6014](https://github.com/aws/eks-anywhere/pull/6014)
- Add support for configuring `egressMasqueradeInterfaces` option in Cilium CNI via EKS Anywhere cluster spec [#6018](https://github.com/aws/eks-anywhere/pull/6018)
- Add support for a flag for create and upgrade cluster to skip the validation `--skip-validations=vsphere-user-privilege`

### Upgraded
- Cluster API Provider vSphere: `v1.6.1` to `v1.7.0`
- Cluster API Provider Cloudstack: `v0.4.9-rc5` to `v0.4.9-rc6`
- Cluster API Provider Nutanix: `v1.2.1` to `v1.2.3`
- Cilium: `v1.11.15` to `v1.12.11`

> 

Reviewer 3: Can we add a note here?

**NOTE:** If you are using the vSphere provider with the Redhat OS family, there is a known issue with VMWare and the new Cilium version that only affects our Redhat variants. To prevent this from affecting your upgrade from EKS Anywhere v0.16 to v0.17, we are adding a temporary daemonset to disable UDP offloading on the nodes before upgrading Cilium. After your cluster is upgraded, the daemonset will be deleted. This note is strictly informational as this change requires no additional effort from the user.

* Installing CSI as part of VSphere cluster creation was deprecated in version `v0.16.0` and has been removed in `v0.17.0`. Please refer to the [deprecation section]({{< relref "../getting-started/vsphere/vsphere-getstarted/#vsphere-csi-driver-deprecation" >}}) in the vSphere provider documentation for more information.
{{% /alert %}}

## [v0.17.0](https://github.com/aws/eks-anywhere/releases/tag/v0.17.0)

> ### Supported OS version details

Reviewer 4: Lets add a note here somewhere, and please check the upgrade docs for this as well, but basically saying that when upgrading to 0.17, or any version for that matter, a new image must be created using the new image-builder cli.

> |              | vSphere | Bare Metal |  Nutanix | CloudStack | Snow  |

Reviewer 4: @abhay-krishna lets add a note somewhere in here, not necessarily right here, calling out the new efi and other image builder options and link to the doc you add.

|    :---:     |  :---:  |   :---:   |   :---:  |    :---:   | :---: |
| Ubuntu       | 20.04	 | 20.04     |	20.04             | Not supported	     | 20.04 |  
|              | 22.04   | 22.04     |  22.04             | Not supported      | Not supported   |
| Bottlerocket | 1.13.1  | 1.13.1    |  Not supported     | Not supported	     | Not supported   |
| RHEL         | 8.7	   | 8.7	     |  Not supported     | 8.7	               | Not supported   |

> **Note:** There is a known [bug](https://github.com/cilium/cilium/issues/18706) with systemd >= 249 and all versions of Cilium. This is currently known to only affect Ubuntu 22.04. This will be fixed in future versions of EKS Anywhere. To work around this issue, use one of the follow options.

Reviewer 5: Ah sorry....mind updating this? 
`To work around this issue, use one of the follow options.` -> `To work around this issue, run one of the follow options on all nodes.`

Option A

```bash
# Does not persist across reboots.
sudo ip rule add from all fwmark 0x200/0xf00 lookup 2004 pref 9  
sudo ip rule add from all fwmark 0xa00/0xf00 lookup 2005 pref 10  
sudo ip rule add from all lookup local pref 100  
```

Option B

```bash
# Does persist across reboots.
# Add these values /etc/systemd/networkd.conf
[Network]
ManageForeignRoutes=no
ManageForeignRoutingPolicyRules=no

> ```

Reviewer 2: Are we creating a separate known-issues section?

@jacobweinstock @jaxesn

### Added
- Add support for AWS CodeCommit repositories in FluxConfig with git configuration [#4290](https://github.com/aws/eks-anywhere/issues/4290)
- Add new information to the EKS Anywhere Cluster status [#5628](https://github.com/aws/eks-anywhere/issues/5628):
  - Add the `ControlPlaneInitialized`, `ControlPlaneReady`, `DefaultCNIConfigured`, `WorkersReady`, and `Ready` conditions.
  - Add the `observedGeneration` field.
  - Add the `failureReason` field.
- Add support for different machine templates for control plane, etcd, and worker node in vSphere provider [#4255](https://github.com/aws/eks-anywhere/issues/4255)

> - Add support for different machine templates for control plane and worker node in Nutanix provider [#6291](https://github.com/aws/eks-anywhere/pull/6291)

Reviewer 6: Did you mean Cloudstack provider here?

Author: yes...

- Add support for Kubernetes version 1.25, 1.26, and 1.27 to CloudStack provider [#6167](https://github.com/aws/eks-anywhere/pull/6167)
- Add bootstrap cluster backup in the event of cluster upgrade error [#6086](https://github.com/aws/eks-anywhere/pull/6086)
- Add support for organizing virtual machines into categories with the Nutanix provider [#6014](https://github.com/aws/eks-anywhere/pull/6014)
- Add support for configuring `egressMasqueradeInterfaces` option in Cilium CNI via EKS Anywhere cluster spec [#6018](https://github.com/aws/eks-anywhere/pull/6018)
- Add support for a flag for create and upgrade cluster to skip the validation `--skip-validations=vsphere-user-privilege`
- Add support for upgrading control plane nodes separately from worker nodes for vSphere, Nutanix, Snow, and Cloudstack providers [#6180](https://github.com/aws/eks-anywhere/pull/6180)
- Add preflight validation to prevent skip eks-a minor version upgrades [#5688](https://github.com/aws/eks-anywhere/issues/5688)

### Upgraded
- Cluster API Provider vSphere: `v1.6.1` to `v1.7.0`
- Cluster API Provider Cloudstack: `v0.4.9-rc5` to `v0.4.9-rc6`
- Cluster API Provider Nutanix: `v1.2.1` to `v1.2.3`

> - Cilium: `v1.11.15` to `v1.12.11`

Reviewer 4: Lets link out tot the cilium changelog. This one is also more important than the others so we lets put it a different section or by itself completely to make it clear

>   NOTE: If you are using the vSphere provider with the Redhat OS family, there is a known issue with VMWare and the new Cilium version that only affects our Redhat variants. To prevent this from affecting your upgrade from EKS Anywhere v0.16 to v0.17, we are adding a temporary daemonset to disable UDP offloading on the nodes before upgrading Cilium. After your cluster is upgraded, the daemonset will be deleted. This note is strictly informational as this change requires no additional effort from the user.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**Note:** If you are using the vSphere provider with the Redhat OS family, there is a known issue with VMWare and the new Cilium version that only affects our Redhat variants. To prevent this from affecting your upgrade from EKS Anywhere v0.16 to v0.17, we are adding a temporary daemonset to disable UDP offloading on the nodes before upgrading Cilium. After your cluster is upgraded, the daemonset will be deleted. This note is strictly informational as this change requires no additional effort from the user.
```

> ### Changed

Reviewer 7: @ddjjia vsphere datacenter thumbprint is now mutable https://github.com/aws/eks-anywhere/issues/6143

Reviewer 8: It was mutable in CLI from 0.9, this one is for FLC.

- Change the default node startup timeout from 10m to 20m in Bare Metal provider [#5942](https://github.com/aws/eks-anywhere/issues/5942)
- EKS-A now fails on pre-flights if a user does not have required permissions. [#5864](https://github.com/aws/eks-anywhere/issues/5864)
- Better representing CLI version and dependencies in EKS-A cluster [#5847](https://github.com/aws/eks-anywhere/issues/5847)

> ### Fixed

Reviewer 7: @chrisdoherty4 should we add this one too? https://github.com/aws/eks-anywhere-build-tooling/pull/2256
it's hegel but issue raised by eksa user

Reviewer 7: @chrisdoherty4 also this one https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api-provider-cloudstack/issues/274

Reviewer 7: @ddjjia we should add this https://github.com/aws/eks-anywhere/issues/6097

Reviewer 2: @ahreehong 
> Bare Metal: fix issue where metadata requests that return non-200 responses were incorrectly treated as OK [#2256](https://github.com/aws/eks-anywhere-build-tooling/pull/2256)

- Fix cluster creation failure when the `<Provider>DatacenterConfig` is missing apiVersion field [#6096](https://github.com/aws/eks-anywhere/issues/6096)
- Allow registry mirror configurations to be mutable for Bottlerocket OS [#2336](https://github.com/aws/eks-anywhere-build-tooling/pull/2336)
- Patch an issue where mutable fields in the EKS Anywhere CloudStack API failed to trigger upgrades [#5910](https://github.com/aws/eks-anywhere/issues/5910)

> - image builder: Fix runtime issue with git in image-builder v0.16.2 binary [#2360](https://github.com/aws/eks-anywhere-build-tooling/pull/2360)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- image builder: Fix runtime issue with git in image-builder v0.16.2 binary [#2360](https://github.com/aws/eks-anywhere-build-tooling/pull/2360)
```
- Bare Metal: fix issue where metadata requests that return non-200 responses were incorrectly treated as OK [#2256](https://github.com/aws/eks-anywhere-build-tooling/pull/2256)
```

> ### Deprecated

Reviewer 4: Lets add a known issues section here and call out the packages thing from @taneyland and the docker clusters upgrade issue due to cilium

`Upgrading Docker clusters from previous versions of EKS-Anywhere may not work on Linux hosts due to an issue in the Cilium 1.11 to 1.12 upgrade.  Docker clusters is meant solely for testing and not recommended or support for production use cases.  There is currently no fixed planned.`

- The bundlesRef field in the cluster spec is now deprecated

> ### Removed

Reviewer 4: Lets get a link to a docs page, which may not exist yet, on how to self-install this driver. we could link out to existing vmware docs. @abhay-krishna please own this.

Reviewer 9: added the doc in this PR: https://github.com/aws/eks-anywhere/pull/6392

> - Installing CSI as part of vSphere cluster creation.

Reviewer 6: Maybe call out the full CSI name
```suggestion
- Installing vSphere CSI Driver as part of vSphere cluster creation.
```

- image builder: Fix runtime issue with git in image-builder v0.16.2 binary [#2360](https://github.com/aws/eks-anywhere-build-tooling/pull/2360)
- Bare Metal: Fix issue where metadata requests that return non-200 responses were incorrectly treated as OK [#2256](https://github.com/aws/eks-anywhere-build-tooling/pull/2256)

### Known Issues:
- Upgrading Docker clusters from previous versions of EKS Anywhere may not work on Linux hosts due to an issue in the Cilium 1.11 to 1.12 upgrade.  Docker clusters is meant solely for testing and not recommended or support for production use cases.  There is currently no fixed planned.
- If you are installing EKS Anywhere Packages, Kubernetes versions 1.23-1.25 are incompatible with Kubernetes versions 1.26-1.27 due to an API difference. This means that you may not have worker nodes on Kubernetes version <= 1.25 when the control plane nodes are on Kubernetes version >= 1.26. Therefore, if you are upgrading your control plane nodes to 1.26, you must upgrade all nodes to 1.26 to avoid failures.

### Deprecated

> - The bundlesRef field in the cluster spec is now deprecated

Reviewer 10: Can we mention that it's being replaced by eksaVersion? Also, mention it will be removed three versions from now.
